# Data Management Plan

## Data Description

The purpose of this project is to observe the effect of various modifications on pomace fiber functionality in alternative applications. The effects will be observed through cell wall analysis, shrinkage upon drying, mechanical properties, water absorption, FTIR, DSC, and SEM/stereomicroscope imaging as well as iphone photographs. Quantitative data will be available in .csv files; images from SEM/stereomicroscope/iphones will be in .jpg format.

## Roles and Responsibilities

The primary researcher will be responsible for the data from project startup until the end of project. The responsibilities include raw data collection, proper documentation and organization of data and procedures, analysis, and sharing results with the post doc and PI. The PI will be responsible for the implementation of the data management plan and will support the primary researcher to plan, analyze, communicate, and publish the data. At the end of project, the PI will have full responsibility for the archiving of data for new researchers within the lab to utilize. The post doc will be responsible for the quality control of the project: ensuring supplies are within code date, maintaining and calibrating lab equipment, confirming the collection of data is according to standard procedures and analysis is correct and accurate. The post doc will also support data collection and analysis as necessary. The PI and post doc will ensure that the primary researcher has properly documented the research in an organized manner so that data and procedures may be reused in the future. Upon completion of the project, all files will be transferred to the PI and backed up on the cloud. If the primary researcher were to leave, all files from the primary researcher would be transferred to the post doc along with the new primary researcher. This project is temporarily not funded through a specific grant until October; however, confidentiality is a requirement of this research lab. 3.	This data will be considered unrestricted since there the leakage of data would not have extremely adverse consequences on the university. However, some care must still be taken to ensure that the data is not published without consent prior to our own publication.

## Data Standards and Metadata
The food science field does not have any specific metadata standards, since the diversity of projects within this field cannot be confined to one format. As previously described, there will be 8 different datasets. Cell wall analysis, shrinkage ratio, mechanical properties, and water absorption will be initially written by hand in a lab notebook and transcribed into an excel document for further, simple calculations. DSC will be directly output to an excel document using the Infinity Pro software. FTIR data will be in a .spc format in the LabCalc software. Pictures will be stored in a designated folder. For better preservation, each picture will also be saved within a table in a .doc with the previously described information treatment, date, time, formulation, camera, and specific procedures used. 

The data will not be changing or updated frequently enough to justify using a version control software. The files will be stored in a YYYYMMDD format with a simplified title of the procedure (such as DSC for differential scanning calorimetry). Each dataset will have its own folder within the overall project folder. All procedures associated with the data will be handwritten in a notebook and are subsequently transcribed into a procedural document (.txt) including: the reagents, equipment, procedure, and calculations sections follow the same format as our standards for the procedures, such as AOAC. The manufacturer handbook associated with each equipment is also available electronically and physically. 

## Storage and Security
Throughout the duration of the project, the data will be stored on the primary researcher’s computer hard drive. Once a week, or daily once critical data is being collected, the entire computer will be backed up onto an external hard drive using the Time Machine software available on mac. Additionally, the primary researcher will use Box through Oregon State as an additional precaution. The datafiles will be stored in a Box Sync folder for automatic upload to the cloud. Once complete datasets are gathered, the data will be emailed and saved to the post doc and principle investigator’s laptops. This is a total of four locations. The data will be retained in this form at least through the completion of the project. Once the project is complete, all raw, clean, and analyzed datasets will be copied onto an external hard drive, shared to Google Drive on personal accounts and shared to the principle investigator in both forms. 

## Access and data sharing
The current dataset can be publicly shared since it does not involve human subjects and will not be patented. It is currently available to the PI, postdoc, and the primary researcher. Upon publication it will also be publicly available in a repository. The neat data files will be available in .csv format. 

## Archiving and Preservation
A data preservation plan will be completed by the end of the project to ensure all information can be incorporated to future projects. The data will be stored in a repository to ensure it is readily accessible to other labs that may use this data. Careful attention to contracts should be made when transferring data to repositories. Additionally, the data will be maintained with the PI for at least 15 years to ensure its longevity within our lab. The raw data, neat data, R codes for analysis, and images will be shared with the PI. The PI, primary researcher, and post doc will ensure that the data is well-structured into appropriate folders and subfolders before its archival. Images will be stored as .jpg, spreadsheets as .csv, and metadata/procedural information/R code stored in a .txt format. 
